docs(tip-1028): rewrite for clarity (#3782)
tempoxyz/tempo: tips/tip-1028.md

## Abstract

This TIP introduces receiver-controlled inbound policies for TIP-20 tokens. Today, only token issuers (via TIP-403 / TIP-1015) decide who may move a token; receivers cannot independently filter what arrives in their balance. This TIP adds:

1. **Token sets** — a new TIP-403 primitive that lets any address declare which TIP-20 token addresses may credit it.
2. **Address-level receive policies** — a per-address configuration on the TIP-403 registry that filters inbound TIP-20 credits by originator and by token, with an optional dedicated recovery contract.
3. **An escrow precompile** — a new precompile that records a fine-grained receipt for each blocked inbound TIP-20 transfer, and lets the receiver (or its designated recovery contract) claim or reroute the funds later.

A blocked inbound never reverts: the funds are credited to a reserved `ESCROW_ADDRESS` inside the TIP-20 token, one receipt bucket is recorded by the escrow precompile, and a blocked-inbound event is emitted that authenticates the receipt witness. Pre-existing token-level (issuer-side) failures continue to revert exactly as today.

> This TIP applies only to TIP-20 precompile flows; ordinary ERC-20 contracts deployed as userland code remain out of scope.

Reviewer: I dont think we need to mention token sets, other types or other types in the abstract. A high level summary should do for this section IMO. Something like: 

```suggestion
TIP-1028 extends TIP-403 with address-level receive policies and token sets, allowing a receiver to control which originators and which TIP-20 tokens may credit it. When a receive policy blocks an inbound transfer or mint, the operation still succeeds at the protocol level, but the funds are credited to `ESCROW_ADDRESS` instead of the receiver and a corresponding escrow receipt is recorded.

The receiver or a designated recovery contract may later claim these escrowed funds. Claims back to the receiver act as an unwind of the original inbound, while claims to other addresses are treated as new transfers.

Token-level authorization remains unchanged and continues to revert on failure. This behavior applies only to TIP-20 precompile flows; ordinary contracts and other precompiles are unaffected.
```

## Motivation

TIP-403 is an issuer-side authorization layer: the token issuer decides who may send, who may receive, and who may mint to whom. It cannot answer the receiver's question, *"do I want to be exposed to this counterparty or this token at all?"*

Plain receiver-side reverts are not a viable substitute. Once an issuer–receiver–counterparty relationship exists, a receiver that later changes a revert-based policy can break in-flight flows and recurring inbounds across the entire system. Reverting receivers also create an asymmetric DoS surface against issuers, integrations, and protocol-owned distribution paths (DEX payouts, fee distributions, AMM outputs).

The design choice in TIP-1028 is therefore:

- **Token-level / issuer-side failures keep reverting.** Issuers retain full control of the token's authorization model; nothing in their semantics changes.
- **Receiver-side failures escrow instead of reverting.** Senders, mints, DEX payouts, and fee distributions still succeed at the protocol layer; the asset is held in `ESCROW_ADDRESS` until the receiver (or its recovery contract) claims it.

> Escrowed funds must carry enough metadata to be programmatically recoverable. An aggregate "amount blocked per (token, receiver)" bucket cannot express TIP-1022 attribution, memo routing, originator-based recovery rules, or transfer-vs-mint provenance. Therefore, the escrow precompile stores one keyed amount per blocked inbound, with ALL the receipt identity (version, requested recipient, block reason, kind, memo, timestamp, nonce) authenticated by the receipt witness and emitted in the blocked event — keeping persistent state to a single slot per receipt while preserving full attribution offchain.

Reviewer: nit: Consider simplifying a bit. Feel free to accept or ignore the following suggestion:

```suggestion
TIP-403 allows token issuers to control who may use a token, but it does not give receivers control over which inbounds they accept. Some applications require receivers to restrict incoming transfers or mints based on the originator or token.

A revert-based receiver policy introduces a liveness problem: once a sender relationship exists, a receiver can later change its policy and cause future transfers or mints to revert, breaking integrations and making delivery unreliable.

TIP-1028 introduces receiver-side controls while preserving liveness. Instead of reverting when a receiver blocks an inbound, the transfer or mint succeeds at the protocol level and the funds are escrowed.

Blocked inbounds remain recoverable and attributable, allowing receivers (or their recovery contracts) to claim funds while preserving context needed for offchain handling.
```

- **TIP-1015 compound policies are unchanged.** Receiver-side address-level controls evaluate exactly one axis (originator → receiver), and never cross-validate against the issuer's `transfer_recipient` / `mint_recipient` roles.
- **TIP-1022 resolution is available at TIP-20 inbound time.** Virtual-address resolution runs before TIP-1028 receiver-side checks; failed resolution still reverts.
- **TIP-1016 gas model.** Cost analysis uses the storage-cost model from TIP-1016 (fresh slot ≈ 250k gas, hot slot update ≈ 2.9k gas, baseline TIP-20 transfer ≈ 50k gas).
- **`ESCROW_ADDRESS` is reserved at protocol level.** No TIP-20 implementation, system contract, or user may treat `ESCROW_ADDRESS` as an ordinary holder. Userland transfers and mints to it MUST revert.
- **Reward state never lives at `ESCROW_ADDRESS`.** Implementations rely on treating the escrow sink as a reward-exempt always-opted-out address; violating this assumption silently corrupts the opted-in supply for reward distribution.

> - **Backwards compatibility.** Addresses with no configured receive controls behave exactly as today. The only new ambient cost on existing flows is one cold storage read of the receiver's packed receive config slot.

Reviewer: This section is a bit confusing, several of these read like core design constraints or requirements (e.g. TIP-403 extension, ESCROW_ADDRESS semantics, reward handling), rather than assumptions. It’s not clear what is truly assumed vs what this TIP enforces. Might be worth tightening this or removing.

# Specification

## 1. System Architecture

> This TIP is intentionally additive: it does not alter TIP-403's existing address-policy ABI, it does not change issuer-side TIP-20 semantics, and it does not introduce new surfaces in TIP-20 callers' interfaces. The new functionality is split across three protocol components, summarized below.

Reviewer: nit: IMO this reads smoother without `:`. 

```suggestion
This TIP is additive and does not alter TIP-403's existing address policy ABI, change issuer-side TIP-20 semantics, or introduce new surfaces in TIP-20 callers' interfaces. The new functionality is split across three protocol components, summarized below.
```

### 1.1 Component Map

| Component | Status | Owns |
|-----------|--------|------|
| **TIP-403 registry** (existing) | extended | Token sets (new primitive), address-level receive config (new mapping), recovery-contract mapping (new mapping), the new `verifyAddressInbound(...)` view |
| **Escrow Precompile** (new, address `ESCROW_ADDRESS`) | introduced by this TIP | Per-receipt amount mapping keyed by a witness-derived hash, `recordBlockedInbound(...)` ingest entrypoint, `claimBlockedReceipt(...)` claim entrypoint, blocked / claim attribution events; also acts as the on-token holder of all blocked balances — `balances[ESCROW_ADDRESS]` inside each TIP-20 token is held by this precompile |
| **TIP-20 token precompile** (existing) | extended | Inbound dispatch: TIP-1022 resolution → issuer-side checks → call `verifyAddressInbound(...)` → either credit `effectiveReceiver` or credit `ESCROW_ADDRESS` and call `recordBlockedInbound(...)`; new escrow-release internal path for `claimBlockedReceipt`; raw-event truthfulness for blocked credits; `setRewardRecipient` / `claimRewards` recipient revalidation |

> The escrow precompile and the TIP-403 registry are independent: the escrow precompile authenticates claims using the receipt witness and the receipt's snapshotted recovery contract, and does **not** read the receiver's current TIP-403 receive config when claiming. The TIP-403 registry, conversely, has no knowledge of escrowed amounts: it only answers `verifyAddressInbound(...)` and exposes the current `recoveryContract` of an address.

Reviewer: IMO I would skip the component map and mention the components with the following:

```suggestion
This TIP introduces three concrete changes:

1. **TIP-403 is extended** with new state and entrypoints:
   - Token sets for filtering inbound tokens
   - Per-address receive configuration (`receivePolicyId`, `tokenSetId`, `recoveryContract`)
   - A new view `verifyAddressInbound(...)` used during TIP-20 flows

2. **A new escrow precompile is introduced**:
   - Holds blocked funds at `ESCROW_ADDRESS`
   - Records one receipt per blocked inbound
   - Exposes `recordBlockedInbound(...)` and `claimBlockedReceipt(...)`

3. **TIP-20 transfer and mint flows add a receiver-side check**:
   - Resolve TIP-1022 addresses
   - Run existing issuer-side checks
   - Call `verifyAddressInbound(...)`
   - If authorized: credit the receiver
   - If blocked: credit `ESCROW_ADDRESS` and record a receipt

```

> ### 1.2 End-to-End Flow Overview

Reviewer: nit: remove this

> The TIP-20 inbound path is the single integration point.

Reviewer: I think it’s worth walking through the flow before the sequence diagram. Coming right after “This TIP introduces three concrete changes,” this is a natural place to explain how the pieces fit together at a high level before showing the diagram.

```suggestion
With these components in place, TIP-20 transfers and mints execute as follows:

1. Resolve the recipient (including TIP-1022 virtual address resolution if applicable).
2. Run issuer-side checks (TIP-403 / TIP-1015).
3. Call `verifyAddressInbound(...)`.
4. If authorized, credit the receiver.
5. If blocked, credit `ESCROW_ADDRESS` and record a receipt.
```

    participant TIP403 as TIP-403 Registry
    participant Escrow
    participant Recipient

    Caller->>Token: transfer(to, amount)

    Note over Token: TIP-20 checks:<br/>pause, recipient, amount<br/>(ok, else revert)
    
    Token->>TIP403: TIP-403 + TIP-1015 token-level policies
    TIP403-->>Token: ok, else revert
    
    Token->>TIP403: TIP-403 (inbound) address-level policies
    TIP403-->>Token: (authorized, blockedReason)

    alt authorized (NONE)
        Note over Token: TIP20 transfer:<br/>debits sender,<br/>credits recipient,<br/>accrues rewards
        Token->>Recipient: emit Transfer(caller, recipient, amount)
        Token-->>Caller: success
    else blocked (TOKEN_SET / RECEIVE_POLICY / both)
        Note over Token: TIP20 transfer:<br/>debits sender,<br/>credits ESCROW,<br/>reward-exempt
        Token->>Escrow: emit Transfer(caller, ESCROW, amount)
        Note over Escrow: store blocked-receipt<br/>digest(receiver,<br/>requestedRecipient,<br/>  originator,<br/>recoveryContract,<br/>reason, kind, memo<br/>blockedAt, blockedNonce)
        Escrow-->>Token: (blockedNonce, blockedAt)
        Token-->>Caller: success<br/>(funds escrowed)
    end
```

> Claim path:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Escrowed funds are released through `claimBlockedReceipt(...)` with the following flow:

1. Validate the caller against the receipt’s `receiver` or snapshotted `recoveryContract`.
2. Recompute the receipt key from the supplied witness.
3. Load and consume the blocked receipt amount.
4. If releasing to the original receiver, credit the receiver directly.
5. If rerouting to another address, enforce destination checks before release.
```

    Note over Escrow: caller check:<br/>msg.sender == receiver if recoveryContract == 0,<br/>else msg.sender == recoveryContract<br/>(ok, else revert)

    Note over Escrow: receiptKey = keccak256(witness)<br/>load and delete blockedReceiptAmount[receiptKey]<br/>(ok, else revert)

    alt recipient == receiver (unwind)
        Note over Token: escrow release:<br/>debits ESCROW,<br/>credits recipient,<br/>reward-exempt
        Token->>Recipient: emit Transfer(ESCROW, recipient, amount)
    else recipient != receiver (reroute)
        Escrow->>TIP403: TIP-403 + TIP-1015<br/> token-level policies<br/> for recipient
        TIP403-->>Escrow: ok, else revert
        Escrow->>TIP403: TIP-403 (inbound)<br/>address-level policies<br/>for receipt.originator
        TIP403-->>Escrow: ok, else revert
        Note over Escrow: if recoveryContract == 0 and via access key:<br/>meter amount against receiver's spending limit
        Note over Token: escrow release:<br/>debits ESCROW,<br/>credits recipient,<br/>reward-exempt
        Token->>Recipient: emit Transfer(ESCROW, recipient, amount)
    end

    Escrow-->>Claimer: success<br/>(emit BlockedReceiptClaimed)
```

> ### 1.3 Scope

Reviewer: Would update to `TIP-20 Affected Paths` or similar.

The address-level inbound authorization layer applies to the following TIP-20 recipient-bearing paths:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This TIP adds receiver-side checks to the following TIP-20 operations:
```

If a token-level TIP-403 or TIP-1015 policy rejects the operation, the operation MUST revert exactly as it does today. If the receiver's address-level controls reject the inbound, the operation MUST be escrowed instead.

TIP-1028 does **NOT** alter:

- `approve` / `permit` / `burn`
- fee refunds via `transfer_fee_post_tx`

> - non-TIP-20 tokens deployed as ordinary contracts

Reviewer: I dont think its necessary to mention this again. We should mention that "TIP-1028 only applies to TIP-20 precompile flows; ordinary contracts and other precompiles are unaffected" once in the overview, rather than restate this throughout the doc.

> - future recipient-bearing system-credit paths that do not identify a concrete originator

Reviewer: What is an example of this? When would there not be an originator?

Author: i don't have any concrete example, let's delete for the sake of simplicity

> - DEX *internal* balances. Gating only kicks in when funds are withdrawn back onto the TIP-20 ledger

Reviewer: Similar to the comment above, I think we can remove this if already specifying that TIP-1028 only applies to TIP20. This implies DEX internal balance is not included in scope.

- the reward subsystem's escrow-ability. Rewards are never escrowed; see [Section 6.3](#63-reward-subsystem)

### 1.4 TIP-1022 Interaction

> If the literal `to` is a TIP-1022 virtual address, TIP-1022 recipient resolution MUST occur **before** TIP-1028 receiver-side authorization. Specifically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `to` address is a TIP-1022 virtual address, TIP-1022 recipient resolution MUST occur **before** TIP-1028 receiver-side authorization. Specifically:
```
